# Project 04 — Double angle-ply laminates (Double-double, DD)

The aim of the work in this project is to apply knowledge from Project 1 to 3 to explore the first ply failure (FPF) performance of composite
laminates with double-angle, as opposed to standard angle-ply configurations.

## Introducton

‘Double angle-ply laminates’. Conventional laminates usually incorporate just 4 ply-angles (quad laminates), namely, 0\textdegree, 90\textdegree \space and $\pm$45\textdegree, which has limited design space. The design of conventional laminates in industry typically follows a number of rules \cite{Bailie1997,york&almeida2018bt}: (i) mid-plane symmetric to prevent thermal warping; (ii) balanced to prevent any mechanical couplings, (iii) the 10 percent rule, which means that each of the 4 plies must take up at least 10\% of the total number of plies and (iv) ply contiguity of no more than 3 plies, to reduce delamination.

A new layup method of composite laminate was introduced by Tsai in 2017, called double angle-ply, or double-double (DD) laminates  \cite{Tsai2017book}. A DD laminate is a novel idea for designing laminates involving two pairs of sub-laminates. These replace conventional fixed ply angles (i.e. 0\textdegree, 90\textdegree, ±45\textdegree), in which the two pairs of fibre angles can theoretically be arbitrary. DD laminates offers great potential for improvements over standard quad laminates, as listed below:

	- DD laminates have been shown to offer potential improvements in first ply failure strength \cite{Tsai2017keynote}
	- Rather than being limited to 4 fixed angles for standard quad designs, $\phi$ and $\psi$ in DD laminates can be any arbitrary angle between 0\textdegree to 90\textdegree. This offers a significantly larger design space compared to standard ply laminates.
	- Ease of manufacturability: DD plies enhance the compatibility between the sub-laminates, which reduces the chance of wrinkle defects during the forming process, hence a higher production rate and lowering the requirement of manufacturing knockdown factors \cite{Nielsen2017}.
	- As $\phi$ and $\psi$ can be arbitrary angles, unlike the set angles found in quads, the fibre potential is allowed to be utilised fully with optimised combinations. Less layers are therefore needed to obtain the same performance as standard laminates of the same mass, which means reductions in the weight of the resulting structure \cite{Vermes2021}.
	* Mid-plane symmetric is not required with DD laminates because $\phi$ and $\psi$ always comes with a positive and negative pair and always repeats, which allows DD laminates to be homogenised more quickly than standard quad laminates \cite{Vermes2021-2,tsai2021dd}. A homogenised laminate refers to a laminate that has repeated properties throughout its thickness.
	* The design and manufacture processes of homogenised laminates is simple, tailoring is also more straightforward and less prone to delamination \cite{Tsai2019book}.
	* Layup speed of DD laminates can be up to 6 times quicker than quad laminates and with less scrap \cite{Tsai2019book}.
	* Tapering can be achieved using a single ply drop-off at each step, rather than two drop-offs, as required with quad laminates \cite{Tsai2019book}.
	* Ply termination of a DD laminate can be done anywhere on the laminate \cite{Tsai2019book}.
	* DD laminates have a less serious problem of blending \cite{Tsai2019book}, which refers to a design methodology where a panel or laminate is divided into different regions, single ply drop off is allowed from one region to the adjacent region according to the load concentration of each region \cite{Kristinsdottir2001}.
	*  More aggressive tapering can be achieved, up to a ratio of 10:1 between the centre and the edge. This can lead to further weight savings \cite{Shrivastava2020,Tsai2017book}.

Double angle ply laminates utilize the same design techniques as standard laminates and the lamination parameters method can also be used for optimisation. Here the stacking sequence can be determined from the desired lamination parameters coordinates, i.e. the position within a lamination parameter design space. Moreover, the required lamination parameter values can be determined by stiffness matching;  matching the lamination parameter coordinates of standard -ply designs for extensional ($\xi_{1-4}$) and bending stiffness ($\xi_{9-10}$) with those of DD laminates. For example, York used a stiffness matching approach to design double angle ply laminates and compared these with standard quads and also performed buckling analysis on the double angle ply laminates \cite{york2020}. Here, lamination parameters were used for optimisation of the buckling performance of the DD laminates. 